---
aliases:
  - integral extension
tags:
  - public
---
[[Ring theory MOC]]
# Integral element

Let $B : A$ be a (commutative) [[ring extension]].

An element $b \in B$ is called **integral** over $A$ iff there exists a nonzero [[Polynomial ring#^monic]] $m_{b}(x) \in A[x]$ such that $m_{b}(b) = 0$. #m/def/ring 
We denote the set of all such elements as $\mathcal{O}_{B:A}$, and by [[#^P1]] this is a ring.

If every $b \in B$ is integral over $A$, then $B$ is called **integral** over $A$, and the extension $B : A$ is called **integral**.

An integral element over $\mathbb{Z}$ is called an [[Algebraic integer]].

## Equivalent conditions

Let $b \in B$. The following are equivalent[^2022]

1. $b$ is integral over $A$; ^I1
2. $A[b]$ is a [[Module-finite R-monoid|module-finite $A$-ring]]; ^I2
3. $A \leq A[b] \leq C \leq B$ where $C : A$ is some finitely generated extension ^I3

> [!check]- Proof
> Suppose [[#^I1]] holds with minimal polynomial
> $$
> \begin{align*}
> m_{b}(x) = x^n + \alpha_{n-1}x^{n-1} + \dots + \alpha_{0}.
> \end{align*}
> $$
> Then $b^n =-(\alpha_{n-1}b^{n-1} + \dots + \alpha_{0})$ so $A[b]$ is generated by $\{ b^j \}_{j=0}^{n-1}$.
> 
> If [[#^I2]] is the case, then we get [[#^I3]] trivially with $C = A[b]$.
> 
> Now supposing [[#^I3]] holds,
> let $\{ c_{i} \}_{i=1}^n$ generate $C$ as an $A$-[[module]].
> Out task is to show that $b$ satisfies a monic polynomial $m_{b}(x) \in A[x]$.
> Since $b \in C$, $b c_{i} \in C$.
> Letting $\mathbf{c} = (c_{i})_{i=1}^n \in \opn M_{n,1}(c)$ we have
> $$
> \begin{align*}
> b \mathbf{c} = \mathbf{ T} \, \mathbf{c}
> \end{align*}
> $$
> for some $\mathbf{T} \in M_{n,n}(A)$,
> and therefore
> $$
> \begin{align*}
> (b \mathbf{1}_{n} - \mathbf{T})\mathbf{c} = 0
> \end{align*}
> $$
> whence by [[Zero of a matrix over a ring]] we have $\det(b\mathbf{1}_{n} - \mathbf{T}) c_{i} = 0$ for all $i$,
> implying $\det(b \mathbf{1}_{n } - \mathbf{T}) = 0$.
> Now since $m_{b}(x) = \det(x\mathbf{1}_{n} + \mathbf{T}) = x^n + Q(x)$ where $\deg Q(x) < n$,
> it follows $m_{b}(x)$ is the required monic polynomial. <span class="QED"/>

  [^2022]: 2022\. [[Sources/@bakerAlgebraicNumberTheory2022|Algebraic number theory course notes]], §2.1, p. 9

## Properties

1. The set of all integral elements over $A$ forms a [[ring]],
    namely the sum and product of integral elements is again integral. ^P1
2. Integrality is **transitive**, namely if $C:B$ is integral and $B : A$ is integral, then $C : A$ is integral. ^P2

> [!check]- Proof of 1–2
> Suppose $x,y \in B$ are integral over $A$.
> By [[#^I2]] it follows $A[x] : A$ is finitely generated,
> and since $y$ is also integral over $A[x]$ it follows $A[x,y]: A[x]$ is finitely generated.
> By [[Finitely generated module over a module-finite R-ring]],
> it follows $A[x,y] : A$ is finitely generated.
> Since both
> $$
> \begin{align*}
> A[xy], A[x+y] \leq A[x,y],
> \end{align*}
> $$
> [[#^P1]] follows from [[#^I3]]. 
> 
> Suppose $C : B$ is integral and $B : A$ is integral.
> Then by [[Finitely generated module over a module-finite R-ring|transitivity of finitely generatedness]] $C : A$ is integral, proving [[#^P2]]. <span class="QED"/>


## See also

- [[Algebraic element]], which is the same notion for fields.
- [[Integrally closed domain]]

#
---
#state/tidy  | #lang/en | #SemBr
